This 20-minute workout is suitable for everyone. You can do it at home and there’s no equipment needed; if you’re unsure about your fitness, speak to your doctor first. It involves short bursts of really hard work, followed by periods of rest. Every move is in the video shown here, so watch it through if you’re not sure about your technique. The warm-upFirst, do a short warm-up to get your heart going. Jog on the spot for 20 seconds, then do 10 low squats: sit down really low, as if on a chair, before rising up. Next, bend at the hips and touch your right hand to your left foot, twisting to do both sides in turn. Last, stand up and swing your arms and shoulders in big circles. (See the full warm-up in the video, above.) The circuitYou’re going to do 30 seconds of work, followed by 30 seconds of rest. Take more rest if you need to: focus on the intensity while working. Running with high kneesKeeping a nice straight back, jog on the spot, lifting your knees really high and pumping your arms as you run. Keep going for 30 seconds. BurpeesFrom a standing start, put your hands on the ground and kick your feet back so you’re in a press-up position (make sure your back is straight). Jump your legs forward so they’re near your hands, then jump up in the air. That’s one burpee. Do as many as you can in 30 seconds. Power squatsLike star jumps, but with an exaggerated wide squat at the bottom, with both arms and legs bent, and your elbows touching your knees. Keeping a straight body, lift your arms either side of your head, elbows bent. Then jump your feet apart, bending the knees, before jumping back. It’s all about speed. Mountain climbersPut your hands on the ground, legs behind you in a press-up position; make sure your back is straight and your bum isn’t in the air. Now run your knees in to your chest in turn. Once you’ve completed the workout, take a short break and have a drink. Then it’s time to go again. Do the whole circuit four times. Warm down with a brief jog on the spot, then stretch. Lean In 15: The Shape Plan, by Joe Wicks, is published by Bluebird at £16.99.