‘She looks bigger on the telly.” It’s a curious thing to say about a flyweight boxer with a fighting weight of 51kg (8st 1lb), but the training gym regular who has sidled over to my side of the ring for a better view of the double Olympic gold champion is right. Nicola Adams is even tinier than you think she’s going to be. Her stature – just shy of 1.62m (5ft 4in) in bouncy trainers – seems too small to contain it all: the Muhammad Ali shuffle, the Miss World smile, the megawatt punch. Adams is dressed in the crisp, boxfresh aesthetic specific to athletes who have made it to business-class lounge level: slim grey marl tracksuit bottoms tucked into pristine white high-top trainers, sizeable diamond studs in her lobes, a fancy pair of gold headphones worn around the neck of her bright white T-shirt. For the portrait, she adds the finishing touches, first pulling on a navy Team GB hoodie and then, after digging around in the side pocket of a Louis Vuitton rucksack, her latest gold medal, which she pulls out of a thick black sock. “Stops it getting scratched,” she says, flashing me that Tinker Bell smile and looping it around her neck. Boxing is big on mythology, and the boxing club on a King’s Cross backstreet that we are borrowing as a portrait studio has gritty glamour in spades. Ali quotes on the walls, fleets of punchbags around a ketchup-red ring, walls crammed with photos of boxing legends, chart music on the radio, a bucket in one corner where the roof leaks. Adams is a heroine here and, word having got out about the shoot, the place is packed. Someone has brought a small dog, someone else a small niece. Someone else has shaved specially. At 33, Adams already has an MBE and a place in history: the first female boxer ever to represent England, the first woman to win an Olympic boxing gold, the first woman to win a second Olympic gold. And the British public don’t just admire her, they love her. “Everyone, everyone is just lovely,” she says. “The other day, an old lady invited me in for a cup of tea.” As the first openly LGBT boxer to win an Olympic medal, Adams – one of very few bisexual black women in British public life – has quietly carved out a new kind of identity. She does not refuse to talk about her sexuality, but she makes minimal issue of it in a way that makes it very clear she does not expect it to dominate conversation. She arrives at today’s shoot with Marlen Esparza, the first American female boxer to qualify for the Olympics, winner of a bronze medal in 2012. It is not at any point made explicit in what capacity Esparza is here, but it’s hard not to notice her, with her Texan drawl, bright splashy leggings, supersized eyelash extensions. Adams has talked about having a girlfriend who wasn’t able to be with her in Rio, but hasn’t named her. Towards the end of our interview, I ask her why her partner couldn’t join her, and she tells me: “She’s an athlete as well, so she had her own commitments, and I understand that.” Which sport, I ask, and she just says, “boxing”. Then she fixes me with that level stare, daring me to look over her shoulder to Esparza, sitting a few feet away doing emails on her laptop. The penny drops. Later, I look up their social media: there are regular photos of the two together, including selfies on both accounts from the red carpet of the Bridget Jones’s Baby premiere, complete with lipstick and hearts-for-eyes emoji. The electric energy of Adams in the ring is belied by her laidback, non-confrontational persona outside. She and Esparza arrived late to our shoot, because their taxi driver had a scrape with a lorry that necessitated a fraught and lengthy exchange of insurance details; then he got lost looking for the gym, but refused to accept navigational help until Esparza insisted. Had she not intervened, the American says, Adams would have let the taxi drive around in circles endlessly rather than make a scene. Esparza arrives a bit rattled by this start to the day. But Adams poses serenely for her portrait, submits gracefully to a protracted selfie session with the gym regulars, and does not stop smiling during the hour that we are talking. Her smile is something of a trademark. Does she do it to unsettle the competition? “Well, I guess when I’m smiling, waving to the crowd, looking really happy, an opponent is going to look at me and think – wow, is she even nervous? But really, I’m just enjoying myself.” Much of her persona – the smile, the Frosties she refuses to give up for breakfast – has this upbeat, almost childlike tone. Right now, she is on her post-Olympic holiday. For two months, she can rest, see friends, relax her diet, cut training right down to four hour-long sessions a week. What is the part about this that she relishes the most – lie-ins? Eating cake? Going out at night? “All of that! Definitely the lie-ins. And the cake. And going out clubbing. But mostly it’s just nice to see friends and family, and catch up with what is going on in their lives, before I’m back in training lockdown.” Taking gold at a home Olympics in 2012, with women’s boxing included for the first time, was hard to beat. But her Rio medal was just as sweet, Adams says, because after overcoming a serious shoulder injury, “this four years taught me a lot about my mental strength”. She didn’t get to see much of Rio on this trip, because she was competing in the last week and was “living and breathing boxing training”, but she got to go to Christ the Redeemer when she visited Rio with David Cameron after the 2012 Olympics. She always thought Team GB would do well in Rio, she says, “because we have the funding and facilities now. We have nutritionists, sports psychologists, strength-training specialists, physiotherapists. What I should be eating, what I should do about any injuries – that’s all taken care of by experts, and all I have to think about is boxing.” I never think, I'll be happy just to win a medal. I’m only happy with gold Adams was in San Diego this summer when she heard Muhammad Ali had died. “I was really upset that I’d never got to meet him, to say to him: you are the reason I wanted to win an Olympic gold medal.” Her first memory of boxing is watching a video of the Rumble in the Jungle with her dad. “I remember how he performed in the ring, but how he was in interviews as well. His charisma, his charm, his cheekiness, his poetry. I just loved all that. He was an entertainer, and I’ve taken a lot of that into my boxing. I like to see the crowd enjoying themselves. If they’re happy, I’m happy.” A few years later, aged 12, she went to the boxing gym for the first time when her mum Dee, by then a single parent, needed somewhere she could leave Nicola while she went to aerobics. “There were kids doing pads, some shadow-boxing, some in the ring. It was really cool, I loved it.” Was it not a bit intimidating, for a 12-year-old girl? She looks a bit nonplussed. “Um, no. Not at all. It was exciting.” Her first competition was a year later – “I won” – but the first opponent she remembers vividly was Sofya Ochigava, who she boxed in the 2007 European Championships. “In the last 30 seconds I was one point up, and I was just about to be European champion. I got excited, I lost my focus, and I switched off for half a second. She scored two points, and I ended up with a silver.” That silver was the first medal won by an English woman at a major international championship, but Adams doesn’t remember it as an achievement. “I was devastated. I never go to a tournament thinking, I’ll be happy just to win a medal. I’m only happy with gold.” Adams came through the ranks with no female role models. She dealt with this by adopting the philosophy of her coach, who on her first day in the gym told her: “In this gym, there’s no male or female. You’re just a boxer.” In other gyms, though, sexism was the norm in the early part of Adams’s career. “Just stuff like, you’d go to a gym and the guys would do eight three-minute stints on the bags, and then the women would just do five. Like, because we’re women we can’t do the full eight! Ha.” The Olympics have had a huge impact on attitudes to female boxing, she says. As has Adams herself. Boxing has always had a strong aesthetic iconography, but strictly a male one. There hasn’t been a beautiful, glamorous female boxer before now. Adams has been profiled in Vogue, and starred in a Marks & Spencer fashion campaign. (That was fun, apparently, because Helen Mirren turned out to be a huge boxing fan.) Recently, Adams upgraded the braided hairstyle she wore in 2012 for a more stylised look, with a high quiff offset by intricately patterned shaved sides. It requires a visit to the hairdresser once a week. (“I like it to look sharp.”) The success of women’s boxing has popularised the sport as fitness – the Instagram feed of any ambitious young model will feature the obligatory gloved-up gym selfie – but Adams is more interested in seeing women’s pro boxing televised. “That would change the game. I’d love to help make that happen,” she says. She waves away the notion that she might worry about the impact of boxing on her brain. But then, her worst injury – one that kept her in bed for three months, and out of the ring for a year, and very nearly prevented her taking part in trials for London 2012 – came from falling down the stairs. Getting back to fitness was “almost like learning to walk again”, she says. “I went from doing 300 sit-ups a day to not being able to lift my shoulders off the floor.” Crucially, though, she never lost her self-belief. “Boxing is 50/50, mental and physical. You can be the strongest, fastest, most technical boxer out there, but if you’re not there mentally, you won’t win. You see boxers who look unbelievable in the gym, and then they get into the ring and they fall to pieces. The mental aspect is about how to stay in control, to get your opponent to make mistakes and then to capitalise on them. It’s a bit like chess, really.” She has played chess since she was 10 years old. After 2012, she says, the decision to pursue further Olympic success over a professional career was simple. “I knew straight away I wanted the double gold. I wanted to make history.” Now – four years older, with fewer years ahead – she faces the same decision again, and she’s not giving anything away. “There’s a lot to think about,” is her deliberately oblique answer. “I’ll make a decision by the end of the year about what the next chapter will be.” Acting will play a bit part, at least. A sideline as an extra in Coronation Street and Emmerdale turned into a bigger part in Waterloo Road after 2012, when she could no longer blend into the background. Acting is on the back burner while she is boxing, but she has at least one role lined up for next year. Whatever the future holds, it will involve an audience. “I love a big moment. I love a big crowd. It’s an amazing feeling. Bigger the better, really.”