The recent hot weather here in Cambridge has sent me back in my memory to Avalon, one of Sydney’s northern beaches. When I was first a student, Avalon was the weekend gathering place for the Bellevue Hill Mob, a bunch of law students I knew at Sydney University. The Mob had more money than I did, but the Australian social system, such as it was, depended on the same sun shining copiously on everybody. I hear it still does, with enough light left over to reach right around the world and roast me here on my balcony, making work impossible, except for my writing increasingly nostalgic poems about Avalon. I have plans to put a couple of them in my new slim volume of poetry, due out early next year. I must be crazy to be planning a new book, or any new anything. In my condition, the best strategy is to lie down and expire. But while breath lasts, it seems a pity to waste any of life’s remaining blessings, and one of those is, for a little while at least, clear sight. As I sit in my cane chair writing poems that evoke the lightly clad Aussie girls of long ago, there are a couple of doves that keep showing up on the next fence down the hill. I don’t quite know the facts about sexual signalling among doves, but I imagine the most furiously preening of the two doves is the bloke. Back in my day, it was the women who vied for attention, but only mildly. In my memory, the children of paradise adjusted fairly well to the climate of Eden. They read books. There was a lissome girl called Pat who was reading Ulysses. Fifty years in the future, I can only just remember her pretty face, but I can remember vividly her taste in reading. And then a lifetime went by, and now the whole Arcadian scene is a memory. Why did I ever leave it? I still don’t know, but the impulse must have had something to do with a desire to see the real world, and that desire must have had something to do with an instinctive realisation that the real world couldn’t be as good as this. The beach house where I used to stay with the Mob had once belonged to the writer Frank Clune, who made his fame with a book called The Ashes Of Hiroshima. In that title lay the hint: we had been born fortunate. As I write, the female dove is still playing hard to get, and the male is inflating his ruff of neck feathers like a diva in a boa. Calm down, boy: if she’s still there on the fence beside you, she’s yours.