Although I’m Punjabi by birth, I grew up in West Bengal. This is a region of India famous for fish, rice, sweets and mustard in all its forms, but its culinary influences reach far beyond these staples. Kolkata – the Bengali capital – is a major seaport and, along with a history of both Turkic and British rule, this makes it an ethnically diverse, metropolitan city. In the 1870s, the city became home to a market designed for westerners, which saw the likes of chana (yellow split peas) introduced by the Portuguese, and European puff pastry, which was then redeveloped into patties. In the 19th century, Chinese immigrants started arriving, eventually opening restaurants to serve both their own community and the existing population, whose native recipes they spiced up with hot sauces and sliced chillies to create a number of hybrid dishes. These Chinese restaurants are still important to the famous food offering on Kolkata’s Park Street. My mother would cook recipes learned from people who came from all over India, and I was exposed to a wide range of techniques and styles of cookery as a child. From Bengali cuisine alone there was lots to learn, from bhapa (either fish or vegetables cooked by steaming with spices) to paturi (fish that is sliced, basted with mustard oil and spices and cooked in a banana leaf). Like my mother before me, and like West Bengal itself, my recipes draw on disparate inspirations, tweaked to the ingredients I happen to have at hand and – even better – those that can be found wherever you are. I use a global palette. My mission is not authenticity, but to represent the spirit of Indian food, which, by nature, can be easily adapted. This week’s recipes highlight both the flexibility and multiculturality inherent to my cooking. The paneer (Indian curd cheese) dish harks back to my Punjabi roots, but builds upon them with layers of flavour from elsewhere. I’ve combined it with panch phoron – the classic spice mix of West Bengal (cumin, fennel, fenugreek, mustard and nigella seeds) – and the Chinese-inspired sweet-and-sour notes of honey and soy sauce. When I was young, my mother would buy soy sauce from a specialist Chinese shop, and then – as we weren’t used to its intense umami saltiness – she would dilute it, sometimes to make a dipping sauce with spring onions, fresh ginger, green chillies and sugar for Nepalese dumplings, known as momo. My spicy pork belly recipe is inspired firstly by a Goan friend of my father’s. He used to make something similar to vindaloo if not totally authentic, marinating cubes of pork belly in vinegar, chillies and garlic, and cooking it on the hob with potatoes (vindaloo’ comes from Portuguese words ‘vinho’ (wine-vinegar) & ‘alho’ (garlic) the following day. I still have that taste in my mind today, but rather than making it into a curry, I’ve taken influence from his flavour base and made a slow-cooked pork belly. This aspect to the dish was inspired by the Ukrainian chef Olia Hercules, who recently made pork belly with my tamarind chutney. In the recipe below, I’ve also added tamarind, balancing its tartness with apple juice (which replaces the Goan’s use of vinegar). The mustard seeds are a Bengali addition, and instead of potatoes, I’ve used plums for some brightness and lightness. While cucumber and mint appear most recognisably in a raita sauce, my earthy beetroot version, served here alongside the spicy pork, makes a gently sweet (not to mention beautiful) accompaniment. It’s inspired by my mother, a great beetroot champion, who would use the purple root fresh in everything when it was in season. And when it wasn’t, we’d get our fix from eating it fermented. Now that I live in the UK, fresh beetroot is always available, and this bowlful of pastel pink has become a perennial pleasure. Serves 3225g paneer, diced into big chunks1 tsp cornflour2 tsp ginger, finely grated 2 tsp garlic, finely grated 2 onions, thinly sliced2 tsp soy sauce2 tsp red Kashmiri chilli paste (see below)3 tsp honey2 tsp tomato ketchup1 tsp cumin powder2 tsp panch phoron (equal amount cumin, fennel, fenugreek, mustard and nigella seeds)Salt, to taste2 tsp rapeseed oil For the paste200g dried red Kashmiri chillies200ml hot water 1 First, make the chilli paste. Soak the dried red Kashmiri chillies in the water for 15 minutes, then blitz together in a blender. The paste can be kept in the fridge for a week. 2 Mix all the remaining ingredients (apart from the oil) and marinate the paneer for half an hour in the fridge before cooking. 3 Heat the oil in a large frying pan. Once hot, add the marinated paneer and cook for 5-6 minutes. My two daughters were born in Britain and this sweet, mild and tender dish suits their palates. This is a real crowdpleaser. Serves 62kg pork belly6 tsp tamarind paste2 tsp mustard seeds2 tsp red Kashmiri chilli powder2 bay leaves1 tsp crushed black pepper10 plums, cut in half and stones removed1 savoy cabbage, chopped500ml apple juiceSalt, to taste2 tsp rapeseed oil 1 Preheat your oven to 160C/325F/gas mark 3. In a roasting tray, rub the bottom side of the pork belly with the tamarind, mustard seeds, chilli and a little bit of salt. On the fat side, rub it with salt, oil and pepper. Add all of the apple juice to the bottom of the tray. Cover with foil and roast for 2 hours. 2 After 2 hours, take the meat out of the tray, put the plums and cabbage underneath it and return the meat to the oven. Cook for a further hour. This raita makes a wonderful foil for the pork – or almost anything, actually. Serves 2100ml natural yoghurt2 tsp grated raw beetroot (skin removed before grating)A pinch of saltSeeds of ½ pomegranate 1 Put the yoghurt in a bowl and whisk until smooth. Add the remaining ingredients and mix well. Serve with pork any other dishes you have made.