Nutritious, adaptable and wonderfully long-lasting, dried pulses are a steadfast presence in cookbook author and owner of Newton and Pott preserves Kylee Newton’s pantry. She buys them in bulk when travelling in Spain or Italy, but also rates London cornershops as an alternative source for 1kg bags, costing a couple of quid – which is four times cheaper than the packets of ready-to-eat lentils Merchant Gourmet do (£2 for 250g). Tinned pulses are similarly practical, with an infinitely more agreeable price tag – supermarket brands hover around the 60p mark. For Bristol-based chef and author of The Five O’Clock Apron Claire Thomson, preparing dried pulses gives markedly more flavourful results, but tinned beans (cannellini, borlotti, kidney, butter) are a sound storecupboard staple: “the stealth ingredient to boost protein, fibre and nutrients in soups, casseroles and bakes.” Her current favourite quick weeknight supper is the below riff on Mexican quesadillas. Claire Thomson’s quick and easy quesadillasSupper in 15 minutes: a meal that everyone enjoys, young and old, give or take additional chilli sauce. Serves 4 1 large onion, finely diced2 or 3 cloves garlic, finely sliced2 tins beans, drained1 tsp smoked paprika1 tsp ground cuminChipotle chilli paste (optional and to taste)A small bunch of coriander, roughly choppedJuice of 1 lime or 1/2 lemonSalt, to taste To assembleShop-bought tortilla wrapsGrated cheeseExtra chilli sauceSalad ingredients 1 Fry the onion until soft and golden (10 mins), add the garlic and spices and fry for another couple of minutes. Add the beans and mix thoroughly into the onions, giving them a good mash with a potato masher or back of a wooden spoon. Add the chilli if using, lime juice, salt and coriander - check for seasoning. 2 Assemble the quesadilla by smothering one half of the wrap with the mashed bean mix and cover with enough grated cheese. Fold the wrap in half. Fry over a moderate heat in a dry frying pan until golden and the cheese within has melted. 3 Chop in half or 3rds and serve the quesadilla with extra chilli sauce and a salad - avocado is great. If food stylist Rosie Reynolds is making a cake, a frosting or something that calls for chocolate without it being the dominant flavour, she’ll plump for supermarket basic own-brand slabs: “It adds enough of a chocolate flavour, it’s a fraction of the price of more expensive brands, and it works really hard for you: you can overbeat it and it never splits. Dearer chocolate needs more careful handling.” At £6.50/kg, Sainsbury’s own-brand cooking chocolate is less than half the price of Green and Black’s (£16.70/kg). A favourite recipe of hers is the below tiffin cake. Rosie Reynolds’s fruit and nut tiffinIngredients bought on the cheap will do just fine here: once they’re combined nobody will know you have been penny pinching – they’ll be too busy asking for a bit more. Makes 16 squares300g plain chocolate, broken into pieces150g butter, cubed75g golden syrup300g rich tea biscuits75g roasted hazelnuts, roughly chopped100g plump sultanas 1 Line a 20 x 20cm brownie tin, or small deep baking tray with baking paper. 2 Put the chocolate, butter and syrup in a bowl set over a pan of barely simmering water, stirring occasionally until smooth and combined. Remove from the heat and set aside. 3 Put the biscuits into a large bowl and bash with the end of a rolling pin until roughly crushed- you are looking for some very fine crumbs and some more chunky ones. Add the chopped nuts and sultanas then pour over the melted chocolate. Stir until everything is fully combined. 4 Tip the mixture into the prepared tin and smooth the surface with the back of a spoon. Transfer to the refrigerator and chill for at least 2 hours. Remove from the fridge 20 minutes before serving. Cut into squares and serve. Farmers’ markets might seem more expensive than supermarkets, but opting for whatever is in season will actually work out more cost-effective, as New York-based chef Amy Chaplin points out. “When there’s an abundance of winter squash in the autumn,” she says, “you can get it very cheaply and store in a cool place for months. You can also cut it up and freeze it. Way cheaper than the supermarkets.” Chef and food writer Jane Baxter can’t walk past a bargain in the rotting veg section of any establishment: “Vegetables can always be made into something or used to pad out a meat dish, so that you are eating 10% meat and 90% veg, which is what any non-vegetarian should be working towards.” Similarly, Guardian columnist Felicity Cloake gets all her fresh fruit and veg from her local market: “It’s usually super-ripe, which suits me, and I don’t mind a few bruises when you can get five avocados for less than the price of a single one at the supermarket.” Most simple produce, no matter how cheap, needs only good olive oil, some seasoning (salt, sugar, spices) and a hot oven to be made into something wonderful. Guardian Cook co-editor Mina Holland brings a glut of apples and pears – no matter how bashed about – back to life with sugar, lemon juice and cinnamon, while food blogger Skye McAlpine roasts persimmons, plums and grapes – pretty much whatever’s available – with honey, salt and sweet spices. A similarly resourceful approach can be taken with seasonal veg: Mina says any potato can be made to sing with those basics and a sprig of rosemary, and food writer Eleonora Galasso can tackle even the cheapest tomato with a hint of caster sugar: Eleonora Galasso’s tomato trickPeel the tomatoes and cut each one in half, removing the seeds. Place the halves in a large bowl. Generously season with oil, salt, pepper and a hint of caster sugar. Mix gently. Line an oven tray with baking paper. Spread the tomato halves out on the tray, ensuring that they are well apart from each other. Place a few smashed garlic cloves on top and finish with a sprinkle of dried mint. Bake at 100C for 2 hours, turning the tomatoes halfway through the cooking. Serve on bruschetta bread or scattered atop a colourful salad and store any leftovers in a sterilized jar, covered with extra virgin olive oil. For London-based chef and owner of Brixton ramen joint Nanban Tim Anderson, cheaper varieties of certain veg are not to be overlooked, in terms of flavour and adaptability: “Cheap button mushrooms (Sainsbury’s, £4.50/kg) are really mushroomy, for lack of a better word. More expensive varieties of mushroom such as oyster, enoki, or beech (Sainsbury’s Taste the Difference speciality mushrooms, £10/kg) have their charms but none of them are as flavourful or as versatile as ordinary button mushrooms. And I’ve never understood the love many chefs have for wild varieties such as chanterelles, trumpets or girolles.” For cookbook author Sabrina Ghayour, buying spices in larger, more inexpensive bags than the more costly supermarket pots makes most sense: “I don’t really have too many rules with spices, other than if it smells good, use it. I think there can be a lot of spice snobbery out there, which scares people into throwing older spices away, but it all depends on how you store them. Also, if people were less afraid of using them in abundance (as I do) then they would use them all the time and not have to worry too much about freshness. I buy my spices from the Tesco Asian import section where you get big bags for £1-£2. I have massive Kilner jars of my basic house spices, which I use a lot of (turmeric, cinnamon, coriander, cumin), and then smaller jars of things like sumac and cardamom.” Asian and Turkish supermarkets are another excellent place to get inexpensive spices in larger quantities: cinnamon sticks are sold in 50g bags at Turkish online supermarket Bakkalim for 89p – the same quantity in Sainsbury’s own-brand 13g jars would set you back £3.85 – that’s over four times dearer. Similarly, Guardian Cook co-editor Nell Card always opts for bog-standard broccoli (Sainsbury’s loose broccoli, £1.40/kg) over more expensive varieties such as tenderstem (£8.75/kg) or purple sprouting: “It’s juicier than the woody PSB and I never know if my daughter is going to eat an entire head or spit it out and throw it on the floor, so I’m more than happy to buy a £1 bowl …”. Tim Anderson concurs, adding, “I also like the range of textures roasted broccoli gives you that other varieties don’t, because they cook too quickly and evenly.” Skye McAlpine uses honey in much of her cooking, be it for roasting fruit or glazing meat, for baked goods or frozen treats, such as the semifreddo here below: “I find that where the honey is just a sweet accent to the dish, it is almost a waste to use the more expensive varieties. I just buy pots at the supermarket (Sainsbury’s Basics, £1/340g pot) and stock up, as I go through it in such extravagant quantities. I like to save special honey for special dishes, where it can really shine, and you can really indulge in the taste: honeycomb on buttery toast always holds a special place in my heart.” Skye McAlpine’s honey, almond and ginger semifreddo Serves 8-102 eggs8 egg yolks200g runny honey600ml double cream75g Chinese stem ginger in syrup75g salted almonds3 tbsp honey, a handful of crystallised ginger, a few whole almonds and a small bunch of fresh thyme, to decorate 1 Line a 22cm round cake tin with clingfilm. Pour the cream into a mixing bowl and whip until thick and stiff. 2 Set a clean heatproof bowl over a saucepan of simmering water, add the egg yolks, eggs and honey, and whisk vigorously until the mixture becomes thick and pale. 3 Gently fold the egg custard into the whipped cream. Roughly chop the stem ginger and the almonds and mix them in. Pour the mixture into the cake tin, cover with clingfilm and set in the freezer for 2-3 hours until solid. When you’re ready to serve the semifreddo, turn it out of the tin onto a plate and drizzle with golden honey, then decorate with almonds, crystallised ginger and sprigs of thyme, as you like. When it comes to oil for cooking and drizzling, London-based chef Ben Tish isn’t fussy: “San Michele does a 750ml bottle of extra virgin, which I use for dressings and drizzling, at about £4-£4.50, and an olive oil I use for cooking that costs £3.50-£4. I think they’re both winners. The flavour’s quite robust – possibly a little unrefined – but it has bags of character. I think fish and meat lightly cooked in it tastes wonderful. The only time I’ll use something different is if I’m deep-frying or cooking at a really high temperature.” Cook columnist and cookbook author  Eve O’Sullivan opts for grana padano (£12.50/kg) whenever a recipe calls for parmesan (£13.50-£22.50/kg), “unless I’m buying a wedge to eat with pears as a dessert or it’s a truly special salad. You’ll be hard pushed to taste any difference when grating it over pasta.” Felicity suggests pecorino as an option. In her view, “good parmesan deserves appreciating on its own”. Felicity Cloake is happy to skimp on wine for cooking: “While I wouldn’t dare contradict the mantra that ‘if you wouldn’t drink it, don’t cook with it’, I get annoyed when recipes call for a specific sort of ruinously expensive, or hard-to-source wine: no doubt Italian peasants once cooked pears in barolo, but kicking off at £16 a bottle in my local supermarket, I won’t be. Instead I prefer to go for a less prestigious wine with similar qualities; in this case, a nebbiolo from the same region. “In general, however, cooking tends to accentuate qualities such as tannins and acidity, so it’s safer to stick with softer, fruitier wines – supermarket own brands are pretty reliable these days, and generally come in at a shade under £5, plus you can pick them up with the other ingredients for the dish. Bonus: anything left over is still perfectly serviceable to drink at home, or at the tail end of a dinner party, when everyone’s stopped noticing what they’re pouring into their glass. “A few recipes call for wines so specific there’s no easy substitute; coq au riesling is a good example. No other grape variety has the same thrilling acidity – but there’s no need to buy a bottle of the really pricey Alsatian stuff unless there’s enough left over for you to enjoy. Go for a cheaper German or new world bottle instead.”